# Ford GoBike System Data Exploration
## by Joseph Mburu


## Dataset

> This report presents data exploration of the Ford GoBike System data. This data was provided by udacity via a [link](https://video.udacity-data.com/topher/2020/October/5f91cf38_201902-fordgobike-tripdata/201902-fordgobike-tripdata.csv) and was used to develop this project. This dataset was from the greater San Francisco Bay area and conveyed information regarding individual rides that were made in a bike-sharing system. In particular, the data contained information regarding trip duration, participants birth year, trip start and end time, participant's gender, user type, start and end station name, among other variables. Before data exploration, preliminary wrangling was performed, where rows with missing values were dropped, outliers replaced, and some variables derived. Some of the variables that were derived included age of the participants, start day and end day. The preliminary data assessment revealed that the Ford GoBike dataset contained 183,412 participants and 16 features and it contained no duplicates. After data wrangling, the data used in the exploration consisted of 174,952 observations and 21 features. To explore the data, we performed three types of visualizations: univariate visualization, bivariate visualization and multivariate visualization. Univariate visualization involved visualization of a single variable to gain insights into the distribution of the data. The bivariate visualization involved visualizing two variables to identify any relationship between them. We then adapted the bivariate visualization to multivariate visualization, where we visualized three or more variables to gain comprehensive understanding of the relationships existing among the variables.


## Summary of Findings

>In the exploration, I found a weak positive relationship between age and duration in seconds. This implies that as the age increases, the trip duration increases. In other words, older participants tend to take more time to complete the trip than young ones, possibly due to energy depreciation as one becomes older. The findings also showed that participants who were subscribers took lesser time to complete the trip than customers. Based on gender, males appeared to complete the trip faster than females. The findings also revealed that there were no difference in age between subscribers and customers. This implies that being a customer or subscriber was independent of age. When the relationship between trip duration and start day was explored, the findings showed that the trips were completed faster on all days of the week than on saturday.  Multivariate exploration also revaled that older females dis not take as much time to complete the trip as males. In addition, the findings showed that young females aged between 18 and 40 years completed the trip faster than males within the same age group. We also found that regardless of the user type, male participants completed the trip faster than females. Besides the main variable of interest, we verified the relationship between trip duration and whether a member shared a bike for all trip. The results showed that those who shared a bike for all trip completed the trip faster than those who did not share a bike for all the trip. 


## Key Insights for Presentation

> For the presentation, I primarily focused on the effects of gender and user type on trip duration. These variables are selected for presentations because they showed clear relationship without ambiguity. I will start by showing the distribution of the trip duration variable after log transformation. I will then introduce the categorical variables, one by one to get insights into the relationship between each of the categorical variable and trip duration. The relationship will be polished using box plots and clustered bar chart.  